---
sidebar_position: 7
hide_title: false
title: 7. Deployment and Supervision of Field Personnel
---

[back to Handbook Chapter 7](/docs/experiences-lessons-2020/Chapter-07/Selected%20country%20experience)

# Chapter 7: Deployment and Supervision of Field Personnel

**Tanzania**

Tanzania developed an alternative back-up means for data collection using enumerator-owned devices. Tanzania developed a custom Android container that could be installed on enumerators’ personal mobile devices. This provided a backup solution in case of mass failure of census tablets. The Android container locked the mobile device for census use only for a specified period. Data were securely synced to the census servers. The pilot was successful and demonstrated the feasibility of using personal devices as a backup. The container secured the device and ensured data was synced securely to servers. The tool wasn't used in the actual enumeration, so real-world challenges weren't fully explored, however, Tanzania would use this approach again as a contingency in case of mass failure of census tablets.

**Botswana**

The Manage Engine Mobile Device Manager plus App (MDM) was used to remotely manage the devices. It included features like device enrolment, app management, remote troubleshooting, device security, location tracking and audit reports. It also helps in wiping the data in case the device is stolen or lost. A standard MDM tool can also track inventory of devices and perform real-time monitoring and reporting. A virtual server for MDM system was created. To allow for troubleshooting in the field, all Statistics Botswana IT Officers were given rights to log in to the system with their domain credentials to create Zoho account and use Zoho Assist.


[back to Handbook Chapter 7](/docs/experiences-lessons-2020/Chapter-07/Selected%20country%20experience)

