---
sidebar_position: 10
hide_title: false
title: 10. Census Analysis, Products, Dissemination and Archiving
---


## Recommendations

Based on the case studies and lessons learned, it is recommended:

- The tabulation plan and analysis should be handled by the subject matter experts from within the NSO and the relevant line ministries to guide on the relevance and interpretation of the results to enhance its use.

- Ensure adequate budgeting and resource mobilisation for development of various products, dissemination and archiving should be in time to ensure the financial support is availed in time.

- Timely launch of the reports has been necessitated and facilitated by technology. Countries should therefore commit to availing the various products in time to the stakeholders to use in the programming and policy formulation.

- Planning and development of the census products should be well thought out, planned, and budgeted to have a successful outcome of the census without delays in release of findings. Untimeliness compromises quality and trust in the data.

- There is a need to address geographical boundary disputes before launch and dissemination of reports by administrative/political boundaries. These disputes affect enumeration and can be resolved and agreed upon during map verification.

- Need to identify various users/stakeholders in time and engage them in the entire census process as this ensures key indicators are included in the various products and provision of technical/financial support. Also the identification of thematic experts and engaging them in good time.

- For archiving, the nature and format of the census data files created in the data processing and dissemination phase should be anonymised microdata and become a standard feature of census data dissemination for the 2030 round of censuses.

Based on the challenges and lessons documented, the following recommendations are proposed:

- NSOs need to plan for dissemination of results ahead of time as it informs resource allocation for the census. Having a successful dissemination schedule/plan necessitates all reports and publications to be produced and released within the timelines; A dissemination plan is priceless as it allows easy implementation of dissemination activities.

- Solicit for the government political will and stakeholder involvement in all census phases to avoid rejection of results. For instance, engage the Office of the President during release of the data to build goodwill from the public as well as give adequate publicity for the dissemination.

- Additionally, census implementing agencies should leverage on technology developments and social media platforms for the census products to reach a wider audience while taking care not to neglect those not able to access the technology. 

- There is need to further decentralise the dissemination of census results from regional down to constituency levels.

- In Eswatini, a national user consultation and telephonic surveys was scheduled. Participants concluded that user involvement is important and productive in all phases of census and development of thematic studies is better to prioritise engaging technical personnel from NSOs, universities and relevant ministries.


[back to Handbook Chapter 10](/docs/experiences-lessons-2020/Chapter-10/Introduction)
