---
sidebar_position: 11
hide_title: false
title: 11. Partnerships and Collaboration
---


## Recommendations

The following recommendations are based on country experiences:

- NSO should remain as the lead agency, however, internal collaboration is the first critical step to lead, coordinate, and provide the legal mandate for the census. Key government collaborators may include ministry of finance/planning, ministry of ICT/Communications, national mapping agency, ministry of interior/local government, defense forces among others.

- Countries are encouraged to leverage partnerships and collaboration in digital census undertakings, especially with the private sector as a cost saving option. It is indispensable for providing the technology and infrastructure that underpins a digital census. E.g. telecommunication companies are crucial for providing mobile network connectivity, bulk SMS services for communication with field staff, and sometimes the devices themselves. Several censuses in the 2020 round saw collaboration with local telecoms. Local IT firms can be essential for on-the-ground technical support, device maintenance, software localisation, and call centre operations. Building the capacity of local firms is a key benefit. Engage warehouse owners for secure storage of census materials.

- Embrace partnership with Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) and community leaders who are the bridge to the people, especially hard-to-reach and marginalised populations. They can play a role in advocacy, public education, monitoring, and building community trust.

- Recommend collaboration with academia and research institutions, especially the university demography departments, computer science and GIS departments as well as research institutions.

- Recommend collaboration with international and multilateral partners, some key partners include:

  - United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) - A leading partner, often providing financial support, procuring hardware (tablets, power banks), and offering extensive technical assistance on    all census phases.

  - United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA) provides technical expertise, develops standardised tools and methodologies, and facilitates knowledge sharing among African countries.

  - The World Bank and African Development Bank (AfDB) are major sources of funding through loans and grants, often tying census support to broader national development goals.

  - Bilateral Donors: Development agencies from countries like the UK, USA (USAID), and Sweden (Sida) provide financial and technical support.



[back to Handbook Chapter 11](/docs/experiences-lessons-2020/Chapter-11/Introduction)
