---
sidebar_position: 2
hide_title: false
title: 2. Geospatial Mapping and EA Database Management
---

## Recommendations

- Given the existing internet challenges in some parts of the continent, the choice of software should take into consideration the ability to work both online and offline.

- Benchmarking with countries that have already undertaken digital cartographic mapping is key in informing the mapping methodology and especially the choice of software.

- Countries should develop their mapping tools and applications using internal capacity at the NSO like in Kenya, Namibia, Uganda among others especially with the choice of simple and tried software such as ArcGIS Survey123 with minimal support from Esri. 

- The use of open-source software should be explored given that it proved to work and saves on costs.  e.g. SmartClient that was used in Botswana saves on costs.

- Have a clear selection criterion of who should be part of the sensitisation meetings, usually the most influential persons in the community are ideal and use trainers/facilitators who are conversant with the local language of the community so that they can translate the message and not use English to avoid any information loss.

- There is a need to provide timely communication for sensitisation meetings to reduce absenteeism of community leaders due to poor cellphone network and short notices. 

- During recruitment, adequate reserve mapping assistants should be recruited to stand in when there were absences, given that the exercise takes a long period of time.

- Cascading and segmenting the mapping application among the field teams with their respective duties is good practice to ensure quality control.

- It is important to have a field work manual and instructions for mapping assistants with clear definitions of concepts especially the delineation between urban and rural EAs.

- Clear cartographic mapping plans should be put in place for mapping of mobile populations like nomads and pastoralists otherwise, they can be missed or double counted.

- Collecting accurate GPS coordinates for the structures, households and features during the mapping is good practice to ensure completeness and enhance spatial data analysis. However, it may slow down the mapping exercise during times when the internet is unstable due to weather etc. Therefore, mechanisms should be put in place to control for displacement of GPS coordinates because of tall buildings and congested structures especially in urban centres.

- It is recommended that proper training and supervision of mapping assistants should be done to avoid the creation of gaps that could delay completion of delineation of EA boundaries.

- NSOs should plan for adequate server space to accommodate the huge geo spatial data such as satellite imageries and aerial photographs.

- There is a need to plan for adequate editing personnel to avoid delaying the EA map editing process.

- NSOs should opt for open-source software as much as possible or plan for adequate GIS licenses and workstations to facilitate faster digitisation process.

- NSOs should purchase adequate computer machines with adequate capacity to process the complex and huge geospatial data.

- It is important to start map production in time to enable earlier finalisation to inform other census processes.  

[back to Handbook Chapter 2](/docs/experiences-lessons-2020/Chapter-02/Introduction)
