---
sidebar_position: 4
hide_title: false
title: 4. Data Capture, Transmission & Management
---

## Recommendations

- Procurement of devices and servers should be completed well in advance-ideally six months before enumeration—to allow for testing and configuration. Standardizing devices across the field force simplifies training and support.

- Data transmission should follow a layered model, with supervisors reviewing data before it is uploaded to central servers. In areas without reliable mobile networks, alternative connectivity solutions such as satellite dishes should be explored.

- Security must be embedded at every level of the operation. This includes using encryption, implementing access controls, and conducting regular audits. Training should be comprehensive and ongoing, covering both the use of digital tools and the importance of data confidentiality. 

-	To ensure the security of the entire infrastructure at all levels, the census implementing agency can engage a consultant to work with the ICT team in areas including data centre security, transmission security, network security and penetration testing.

- Pilot testing is essential. All systems and tools should be thoroughly tested during pilot exercises to identify and resolve issues before the main census. Public engagement is also critical. Educating the population about digital enumeration methods can increase participation and reduce resistance.

[back to Handbook Chapter 4](/docs/experiences-lessons-2020/Chapter-04/Introduction)
