---
sidebar_position: 9
hide_title: false
title: 9. Quality Assurance, Monitoring, Evaluation, and Risk Management
---

## Recommendations

- Digital technologies offer more choice on how to conduct a census but introduce new complexity. Therefore, it is important to carefully consider how the tools and the subsequent design will deliver the requirements of users to sufficient quality while upholding statistical standards.

- Integrate monitoring, evaluation, quality and risk management into all phases of the digital census, from planning to dissemination.

- Leverage digital tools for real-time data validation, automated error detection, and continuous monitoring.

- Invest in training and capacity building to ensure that census staff can effectively use digital quality assurance tools and interpret their results.

- Establish clear protocols for risk and data quality assessment, reporting, and corrective action, ensuring that risk and quality issues are addressed promptly and effectively.

- Evaluate and adapt quality assurance and risk mitigation strategies based on lessons learned and technological advancements, continuously improving the effectiveness of risk and quality management practices.

- Independent monitoring by international observers should be embraced as it promotes credibility of the entire census process and provides a lesson learnt for countries planning a census exercise.

- Develop a comprehensive risk management strategy that addresses a wide array of challenges, from the foundational issues of infrastructure and security to the more nuanced socio-cultural and governance factors. Endeavour to build capacity to execute that plan in a challenging environment.

[back to Handbook Chapter 9](/docs/experiences-lessons-2020/Chapter-09/Introduction)
